Go normally through Grover Cleveland slides, emphasizing that what we're trying to do is determine who has authority
Skip freedom index (for now only, perhaps) and thinking inside the box
Discuss recurrence to fundamental principles, paying attention to idea of "precedent"
Introduce Roman Law section by talking about two contending forces. Perhaps add slide.
Remove "We will rule our own territory", add a couple slides to show killing fields made by Germans, and move Hermans Denkmaal slides here.
"Eventually the law of these German tribes made its way to England, by way of two brothers, Hengist and Horsa. Here it became known as 'Anglo-Saxon Common Law'"
Put "don't hit other people or take their stuff" slide here.
Remove Jefferson's "Preserve our principles" unless it can be made to make sense". Rename later "Preserve our principles" slide
"... There was another important aspect to this common law; it comes from the Old Testamant"... and tell about Moses (better picture?)
Remove shire reef slide, next two of famous sheriffs
Insert something highlighting "two contending forces", but better than the slide with just fasces and Hengist / Horsa coin
Skip Utah enabling act slides here, go straight to clause family. "The Constitution consists of many clauses; we'll talk about seven, which have been particularly abused by those who would twist them according to Roman Law"

Skip truism (but have it somewhere later)
skip the bits of Utah law that make the office of sheriff

"So we've got these two ideas of how government should function, which brings us to the principle of 'Sovereignty'"
    * Define sovereignty here, per Blackstone, or Webster 1828, or something. Perhaps the "Summary" slide from part 2
Talk about Mack v. Printz, Hamilton and sovereignty

Skip ugly "We the people of the United States is a nationalist system" slide, and pictures of nationalists
Show fasces slides, but skip "states' rights advocates" slide and possibly the one before it
Move the S.L. Tribune slide until later, and let's talk about the situation of the states at the adoption of the Constitution
Skip "Delgate vs. surrender", or talk about it back in Mack v. Printz slides
"The constitution was designed as a contract between 13 pre-existing, independent countries"
Move slides including "list of delegated powers" and Madison's "established by compact" here, after the "The Situation in 1776" slide

"The Constitution is a straightforward document. It's short, and meant to be understood. Noah Webster tried to help. Among other things, he defined 'Engagement', which is the first of the seven clauses we'll talk about."
Skip "Sovereign States, 1788" slides

Talk about Engagement clause, and federal land, through friedman v. goodwin

Skip to "Federal Court" slide, saying this is the current view of things, and ask if it's consistent with Friedman v. Goodwin
Include "Imperium in imperio", Skip pencil drawing slides (but insert 'em later, like when we talk about Kleppe and the Supremacy clause, respectively)
Skip to the Owl slide.

If we're talking about clauses here, it's not the place to bring up interposition. But I'm not sure what *is* the place. Probably later when talking about Phil Barney et al. Meantime, skip to Guarantee clause
Skip all the "Republic" slides, and go to the map of federal land
Include law school
Talk about Property clause, mention that we need a brief segue to talk about Enclaves as well
Skip the fortress
Skip "Fundamental Rule of Constitutional Interpretation". It's correct, and useful, but requires too much 1) independent thought, or 2) explanation
Talk about "disposal" clause, and Gouv. Morris's duplicity
Swap "James Kent" with the slide before it
Penumbrae is useful to know about, but ... might be worth removing
Lose the Morris lips
Concentrate all of Kleppe in this area
Lose the "44% F" slide, since we deleted its predecessor
Lose the bit about the clause family in a coffin

We don't really ever talk about the claims clause. Hrm.

Skip mentioning "Statehood", perhaps
Skip the window, and just talk about the principles of socialism.

Gotta include the Yreka stuff.

Skip the torture rack, perhaps include Federal "Registery" growth graph and "A few copies" slides, with Madison's note
Skip "Constitutional Sheriffs" images
Skip everything (erg...) until Madison's "encroachments of the Federal Government" slide
Skip constitutional sheriffs again, and end with oaths

